# Summary of Week03 Lecture

### Ethics and Law

General message:

```
Legal != Ethical
Ethical != Legal
```

For example, Legal != Ethical: Queensland laws can accuse Women of Witchcraft.
Ethical != Legal: Jumping queues when waiting for your coffee.
There is no strict one-to-one relationship between ethics and law, but your code of ethics/conduct is going to be shaped by our laws.

Laws are generally supposed to be "Action Guiding", for example: speeding - how fast you should be going.
How does ethic guide your conduct? For example: ACM Code, breach of Code leads to expulsion
ACM is important for reputation on your professional, for example: doctors associated with college of physicians.

### Values, Principles, Practices and Purpose

Values = What we strive for, for example: value of Integrity, Transparency, etc.
Principles = Shape conduct, for example: common principles in professional ethics: the harm minimisation principle, do no harm or justice: which equates to fairness,
beneficious: which equates to social.
Responsibility = For any principle or professional value, we are responsible and expectated to upheld them.
Practices = How we follow and implement such principles or professionals in the real world.
Purposes = How we unite Values and Principles, and why we list/follow such code of ethics/conduct.

### Is Technology Neutral?

Perspective 1: (law 1) Technology is not good nor bad, and not neutral.
For example: "Guns don't kill people, people do", technically true but guns improve efficiency in killing others over a knife.
"Military technology" originated day-to-day technology.
"Atomic Bomb": Purpose is to mass kill, indiscriminate including civilian targets, radioactive fallout, and is not precise in killing unlike an assault rifle, however is an atomic bomb good/bad/neutral?
What exactly is the "good" of atomic bombs? Ending war, however more countries uphold it.
Technology gives options, however certain options do not generally have a good outcome.

(law 2) Necessity is the mother of innovation
For example: privacy and confidentiality - users were not thinking of data security and privacy.
United Nations: exploring breach of human rights via digital means, 2023 summit occuring which will eventually influence Australian technoly-based law.

**Technology is a means with external ends**: The use we put technology to ultimately depends on the user, for example: assault rifle has no say on how it is used.
The **way** we use technology can be either good or bad.

### History of technology is relevant

Important inventions:

Basic form of technology: writting/script - preserve information.
Modern form of technology: smartphone - numbers/information conveyed through script.

Printing press: Prior to the printing press, 95% of the population could not read, movement of oral to written-text based culture.
Allowed mass printing and circulation of books and literature.
Movement from the medieval world to the modern.

Armour: military-based technology.
Communication via telegram (revolutionary).
Modern: smartphone, circuits, electricity.

Marxist history is based on innovations from technology, society is based on such progression.

### Responsibility from the Creators of Technology

- Researchers make decisions, and any decision made can have an ethical aspect behind it, for example: inventor of the Atomic Bomb.
- Think in terms of ethics, and the outcome when inventing products/services.
- What is the use potential of what I am attempting to invent. How could a malicious user of this product abuse it? What is the worst-case use?
- Invent some sort of buffer to prevent abuse of products/services.
- For example: Designers of the internet were not actively thinking of the sharing of abusive material when inventing the internet, the bitcoin was propped by the drug-market from the demand of
  having a decentralised and deregulated currency.

### Technology opens possibilities

- Molly-Russell Case: exposure to suicide-type content.
- Young girl suffering depression using instagram to browse content related to self-harm and suicide, moving into areas where other depressed users were sharing content.
- Instagram: how to prevent? Social media is a vehicle to express themselves, e.g. happy people share joyful content, depressing/suicidal users will express themselves in suicidal ways.
- Reinforce suicidal thinking on their pysche, desires, life-style and health.
- Understand that there are a range of expressions that can be expressed on Social Media based on human nature.
- Result: Instagram executives acknowledges _some_ responsibility to the Molly-Russell case.

### Code of Conduct

**Foundation:**

ACM Code: Developed through an ethical approach of principlism.
1979: Beauchump & Childres - responding to the idea of high-moral theories are difficult for average people to employ.
Thinking primarily in medical ethics, "4 Principles of Bio-ethics" sets the foundation of profession ethics and code of ethics/conduct in the 1980s onward.

- Beneficiance = do good.
- Non-Meleficence = do no harm.
- Autonomy = self direction
- Justice = fairness

Attempted to take the main moral theories into principles.
Specific nature of cases (ethical problems), we look at the case, think of moral implications/our intuitions, how we resolve other similar cases, and look at the principles.
Bring these three things into equilibrium with each other and develop such principles further. Hence there is expanding principles.
Each individual principle may develop (understand them better) and principles are added.

1 section: Principles
2 section: Professional responsibilities
3 section: Professional leadership
4 section: potential expulsion if not following the ACM.

### Breakdown of Principles in the Code

1.1

- Contribute to Wellbeing (util)
- All People are Stakeholders (util)

  1.2

- Negative consequences (util)
- Unjustified Harms (principle)
- Well intentional acts that lead to harm (principle)

  1.3

- Transparency (virtue)
- No false claims (Deontology)
- Honesty about Qualifications (virtue)
- Conscious of Conflicts (virtue)

  1.4

- Non-discrimination (Deontology)
- Fairness and allowing for redress (Deontological + Principilist)
- Limiting inequality, i.e. Universal Access (virtue + Deontological)

  1.5

- Intellectual property rights (Deontological)
- Need for Sharing Work and Cooperation (virtue)

  1.6

- Individual rights to privacy (Deontological)
- Issue of Consent

  1.7

- Entrusted (virtue, i.e. trustworthy)
- Honour confidentiality (virtue) (except if it breaks the law)

### Consent

1. Capacity (ability to cognitively make a decision)
2. Information (informed)

### Dignity

Your Code derives dignity, not from Kant but from the **Universal Decleration of Human Rights**. However the UDHR was written by Hans Kelson who is a Kantian but Kelson also uses _religious conceptions_ of dignity and _Ancient Rome_.

(note: Rights and Duties, 2 sides 1 coin - and generally refers to Deontology)
