# Summary of Week04 Lecture

All credit goes to UNSW COMP4920's notes, I do not own a part of these notes - they have been inspired from my Tutor's work: Philip Quadrio, 12/10/2022.

### Ethics Washing

Ethics washing refers to specific critique, differing for Munn's central criticism.
For example, airline companies promoting a green image despite being in a polluting industry.

### MUNN: AI Ethics has a capacity to harm

- Harm is more than physical harm - psychology, emotional, property.
- Can exacerbate inequality - racial or demographic profiling, impacting on minorities and worst off.
- Racialised assumptions - in security, in screening (jobs) ...
- Undermines Democratic values - social media disinformation during electoral cycle
- Human Rights and dignity - rights to privacy
- AI Ethics _social space_ that is already stratified (economic, racial and gendered stratification)

For example: Parallels to Townhall's old CCTV scripting to find middle-eastern men, young men in hoodies etc.
Social media - impacting US Federal elections, Russia causing unrest via social media for both the left and right.
Pitch products to consumer habits lead to lack of privacy.

### MUNN: Turn to AI ethics ineffective

- AI Ethics: in Munn's view - is about _regulation_ through codes and principles.
- Codes and Principles seem to _neglect_ the political, social and cultural dimensions bound up with AI in general.
- While we fail to address the broader political, social and cultural dimensions it will continue to harm.
- Codes work through principles, practices are shaped by politics, economics and culture.
- So, **Gap between Principles and Practice** as Practice is shaped by politics, economics and culture. However
  priciples simply sit somewhere.

AI production is lead from deeper problems inside society and is simply layered ontop of these deeper issues inside society.
Thus, source of the "harm" will remain.

### MUNN: Meaningless Principles

- Meaningless, isolated and toothless
- Highly abstract and ambigious principles which _almost become incoherent_ for example: moral philosophy = the 'good' = about beneficence = do 'good'(?).
- They promise to be action guiding but are ultimately too abstract to guide practical actions.
- They provide few specific recommendations.
- Concepts such as Autonomy, Beneficence, Non-Maleficence, Justice and Explicability are contested, that is; the principles are expressed
  through concepts that can be interpreted differently, contesting meaning.
- There can be conflicts and contradictions between them sometimes respecting autonomy contradicts other principles (doing good - beneficence).
- They can be defined to suit a corporate agenda that might not be good for society/humanity.
- Fail to address political tension.

For example: these concepts can have differing perspectives/definitions based on who ask. Principles can also contradict with each other - for example:
an addicted drug-user in rehab. Furthermore, might cater to a corporate agenda that may ultimately be negative to society.
case-example: not using plastics from airline companies but still uses fuel... shapes and twists principles.

### MUNN: Isolated Principles

- "The principles are isolated."
- AI Ethics discretely parceled up and tucked away as a niche topic at end of a course of study, not integrated into the wider program of study.
- Development of tech occurs in a social and political context: it is social, cultural and political and is influence by society, culture and political
  practices as well as existing tech practices.
- Education focus is on professionalism and professional ethics and ignores social and political issues.
- The toxic culture (e.g. Brogrammers) is bound up with broader cultural, social and political issues.
- **Isolated** from social and political background leads to _'tweaking'_ as a remedy (but this tweaking is too narrow),
- Organisational culture and commerical culture leads to a focus on 'ethics' and ineffectual solutions.
- Failure to build ethical AI is an organisational failure, to address the _sources_.

Brogrammer: hypermasculine programmer, for example: midnight, shirtless, sunglasses etc.
This is bound by broader societal, political and cultural issues, stems from 'Bro' which is created from the masculine culture in society.
Hence this 'AI problem' stems from a deeper issue.

### MUNN: Toothless Principles

- There is nothing to enforce these principles, However Code has expulsion as a consequence. Note: AMA (aus med assoc) conveys doctor has been deregisted.
  Big impact on doctor's career/life.
  1. ACM does not seem to have direct communication of expelled workers.
  2. Question: how much will this disciplinary action push a worker to reflect on their own actions?
- The principles _lack enforcement measures_ - perhaps expulsion from ACM.
- _Incentive to enforcement overwritten by economic incentives._
- Companies will **actively** impede, resist, reinterpret and overturn governance regulations (for _profitability_).
  1. In regard to State and Federal law they will lobby government for self regulation or soft regulation.
  2. Often insist that 'market solutions' are best solution (fits with a commercial and capitalist culture).
- MUNN: What is the point of the principles and instructing on the principles if there is **not** tangible enforcement?
  1. Possible response: move away from industry-based regulations (ACM) towards more government based regulation but industries will actively resist/lobby.
  2. For example: APRA overturns AMA (from industry-based to government), leading to more formal/heavy disciplinary action.

### BEITTI: Ethics washing = corporate fascade

- Ethics washing is _never fundamentally_ about ethics.
- **Appearances vs reality**: Ethics washing is about organisations 'appearing' ethical not 'being' ethical.
- Instrumentalises ethics language, that is, uses 'ethics' speak to facilitate non-ethical ends.
  1. Appearing ethical is good for the bottom line.
  2. Appearing ethical is good for reputation.
  3. Appearing ethical can create a good contrast with competitors.
- Ethics washing _simplifies_ ethical work.
  - Companies do not care about the complexity of moral ethical thought, they simply pursue a reputation to 'appear' ethical.
- The happy side of AI ethics leads us to think deregulation or self-regulation is justified, it could lead us to prefer
  market solutions - but this benefits organisations more than society.

Comment: public charity giving on huge check infront of media in a townhall setting, companies name is shown and amount of money, seems to be reputation-based.
Question: If you are not allowed to create massive media attention from the act of charity, would you give the money in the first place?

YOU vs Competitor: being 'ethical' can improve bottom-line.

### BEITTI: Instrumental vs. Intrinsic

- If we note that ethics washing instrumentalises the language of ethics then we can make this distinction.
- Intrinsic value of ethical language: ethics is valuable in of itself, independently of any end it serves.
  1. This is a real commitment to ethics and a real attempt to help us be morally conscientious agents.
  2. Ethics and moral philosophy helps us understand and appreciate the complexity of moral problems leading
     to more sophisticated and nuanced answers to those problems.
- Instrumental value of ethical language: the goal and ends of ethical or moral talk are either secondary or superfluous to the 'real'.
  object of ethical talk = organisational and corporate goals and ends.
  1. Ethics and moral philosophy just a tool used to achieve non-ethical goals or ends.
  2. NOTE: instrumentalism - the ends are complexity external to means (goals external to 'ethical tools').
- Related to MUNN: When ethics is motivated bv goals to external to moral philosophy, the more doubtful we can about its outcomes for society.

### BEITTI: Narrowness of Ethics

- Instrumentalised ethics has a narrow focus because the ethics ends are not the real goals.
- The narrower the focus is on a problem, the more narrow the response to that problem.
  - E.G. tweaking product for gender-fariness, miss deeper organisation/industry/culture issue.
  - Racial basis - if we narrow to just fairness (tweaking AI), we miss the more systemic issue of race, the racialised assumptions
    of programmers, or of the organisation, industry and culture.

### Embedding moral philosophers in organisations

- Seems a positive move: appears to have a more robout moral and philosophical conversation.
  - BEITTI agrees: need to acknowledge that sometimes self regulation is better/more efficient.
  - A desire to foster a positive image is understandable.
- Could serve corporations _more_ than users.
  - Should serve humanity over companies interest but may not.
  - Can be used as another element in another ethic washing project.
- (To ONLY use a philosopher onboard) Could shield the company from external regulation while continuing unethical practices that are profitable.

### BEITTI: Ethics Bashing

- Biproduct of ethics washing.
- _Mostly_ comes from sociologists and non-philosphers who are concerned by the **instrumental** use of ethics language. They see how it serves _corporate ends_.
- It conflates the term 'ethics' with what is encountered in the practice of the ethics bv companies engaged in washing: so... they understand
  ethics through the _lens of ethics washing_.
- Ethics becomes _reduced_ to ethics washing and all ethical talk is viewed as a 'corporate speak' that _conceals a non-ethical agenda_.
- So, ethics is bashed because 'ethics itself' is just a mask for something else.
  - Could be related to Marxist critique... clouding the pursuit of profit with ethical/mystic language.

E.g. LGBTQ Pride, Dell and AT&T showcasing pride logo but donating to anti-lgbt based politicians.
These corporate brandings do not represent any ethical/moral standing, and may exist to only appeal to the public to appease corporate agenda.
