### Summary of Week01 Lectures

#### Reasoning

- Utilitarniasm: a desire to generate happiness and reduce suffering through the design of empiricaliscm.
- Empiriscm: methadoligical move, taking _observation_ and refining observation, building bodies of data into workable/developable theories.

**Descriptive premise**: there are two chairs behind that table. (describing) What you do.
**Prescriptive premise (normative)**: there should be two chairs there. (prescriptive) What you should do.

Moral reasoning is **prescriptive**, "you should always pay your debts".
Cannot generate a prescriptive conclusion from descriptive claims, for example: "Apples are for eating, therefore you should eat apples."

David Hume, 1750s: "cannot get **is to ought**" (_is-ought_ distinction).

**Consequentialism**: simple notion that goodness/badness of an action has some relationship to consequences/outcomes.
In some manner, consequences are important. Are we always going to have a consequentialist views even if we do not know the outcome.
Different _forms_ of consequentialism:

- Hedonist: _Pleasure/pain_.
- Preferences: _Maximise_ satisfaction of _individual_ preferences (preferences can be volative though).

Horrible acts can lead to good outcomes, main criticism of utilitaranism.
Example: Nuclear bombing on japan, but had _false_ good outcomes (bringing the war to a close).

**False conciousness**: Example: We all want a capitalist society to satisfy our desires - marxism/socialism says that is a false conciousness, what we really want
is _everyone_ to prosper and have their needs met. Because of the type of culture you live in, you think you want that specific thing, not actually want it.

**False attributions**: Attributing false attributions to someone despite not fiting those attributions.

Who counts morally? Everyone is worth 1, no more or less.
**Naturalistic theory**: Only refers to states and affairs, aswell as future state/affairs (possible anticipation).

_Measuring happiness?_: Uses various assumptions, and ask is it fair to assume such things.

**Trolley problem**
**Collision avoidance**: With automated vehicles.
**First assessment**: Essay.
**Second assessment**: Presentation.
